Hey, Bridgetown family, Bethany here.
I wanted to take a moment to invite you to Bridgetown's eighth annual Holy Spirit Conference on January 23rd and 24th at Portland's Keller Auditorium.
The theme of this year's conference is the healing after the healing.
And we'll be exploring how the miraculous work of the Holy Spirit is often just the first step to deeper, slower, soul-level healing.
Like the man born blind in John 9, every part of us that God heals only exposes a deeper part of us awaiting healing from the same God.
And the deepest healing is often the slowest kind.
We are so excited to be joined by contributors like Ruth Haley Barton, Kurt Thompson, Ken Shigamatsu, and Brooke Ligitwood.
Livestream tickets are available now at holyspiritco.me.
I hope you can join us.
Someone in the crowd said to him,
Teacher, my brother, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."
Jesus replied, Man, who appointed me a judge or an arbiter between you?
Then he said to them, Watch out.
Be on your guard against all kinds of greed.
Life does not consist in an abundance of possessions.
And he told them this parable.
The ground of a certain rich man yielded an abundant harvest.
And he thought to himself, What shall I do?
I have no place to store my crops."
Then he said, this is what I'll do.
I will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, and there I will store my surplus grain.
And I'll say to myself, you have plenty of grain laid up for many years.
Take life easy, eat, drink, and be merry.
But God said to him, you fool, this very night your life will be demanded from you.
Then who will get what you have prepared for yourself?
This is how it will be with whoever stores up things for themselves, but is not rich towards God.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or about your body, what you will wear.
For life is more than food and your body more than clothes.
Consider the ravens.
They do not sow or reap.
They have no storeroom or barn, yet God feeds them.
And how much more valuable
you are than birds.
Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to your life?
Since you cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
Consider how the wildflowers grow.
They do not labor or spin, yet I tell you, not even Solomon, and all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
If that is how God closed the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, how much more will he clothe you?
you of little faith.
And do not set your heart on what you will eat or drink.
Do not worry about it.
For the pagan world runs after all such things, and your father knows that you need them.
But seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
Do not be afraid, little flock, for your father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
Sell your possessions and give to the poor.
Provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out.
a treasure in heaven that will never fail, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
For where your treasure is, that your heart will also, will be also."
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
Don't store away any more grain than you need.
That sounds so naive, doesn't it?
Is that even prudent?
Don't save?
Full disclosure, this is not hyperbole.
This is actual factual information about my personal finances.
Now, suddenly everyone's interested.
I have a savings account, a 401k, a 403b retirement plan, a few conservative investments I don't understand, and when my dad kicks the bucket, I'm not 100% sure, but I think I've got some cash coming my way then too.
Am I the fool that Jesus just called out?
Don't worry about what you'll wear or eat.
God will provide for you like the ravens and the flowers.
Sure Jesus, but I'm not a flower and they die every winter.
So I need a coat and ideally a cool one.
Maybe if you're a trust fund kid who moved to San Francisco, got a few piercings and grew his hair out, then sure go ahead and pretend you're a flower.
But if I grew up in the housing projects, then look Jesus, I'm not a flower or raven and I want to give my kids of something better than what I inherited.
So I will be laboring and spending.
Thank you very much.
Don't build bigger barns.
But maybe even as that's read, you're already filtering that through some reasoning that goes something like, well Jesus spoke those words into a first century agrarian world before sophisticated banking, investing in cryptocurrency, let alone the complexities of an unstable national economy and a rapidly changing global economy.
So Jesus' take on money reads dated, naive, and to be completely honest, unwise.
So I'll just assume that if Jesus was teaching today, he would probably advise a thoughtful investment portfolio and generous stewardship.
How else can I live the ethic of a first century Eastern teacher in a modern Western economy?
You see what I'm trying to point out is that Jesus is teaching on money and the sin attached to it named greed produces important psychological, sociological, and spiritual questions.
So that is a map of how we will traverse the terrain
of Luke chapter 12.
Now if you're not aware, we are currently in the mess of a teaching series on the seven deadly sins.
We got our start a couple of weeks ago with envy.
And then last Sunday we were joined by Christine Kane who taught on anger.
And how helpful was that?
It was stunning.
I was so helped by it when I went back and listened and up for this evening is greed.
So let's begin with the psychology of greed.
Back to Luke chapter 12, I'm gonna pick up in verse 15, follow along with me in your Bibles.
Watch out beyond guard against all kinds of greed.
Life does not consist in an abundance of possessions.
So greed in Jesus' imagination is about your possessions, your stuff, but more than a sufficient amount of stuff.
It's about an abundance of stuff.
It's an overstuffed fridge with far more food than I need or a closet with 20 pairs of shoes in it.
It's a cavernous house full of unoccupied bedrooms.
All of that can be greed, but it doesn't have to be.
Greed's not quite that black and white.
So what makes an abundance of possessions greed?
A mindset of scarcity.
Scarcity is the usually unspoken assumption that there's not enough for everyone, and so in order to survive, I need to provide for myself and look out for myself.
Anthropologist Marshall Solans writes, modern capitalist societies, however richly endowed, dedicate themselves to the proposition of scarcity.
Inadequacy of economic means is the first principle of the world's wealthiest peoples.
You see scarcity is a mindset, it's a psychology leading to anxiety in the gut and then giving birth to greed in the world.
Which is why Jesus begins with a warning about wanting and having too much and then seamlessly connects that, the stuff that you own with the worries that occupy your mind.
Verse 22, therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or about your body, what you will wear.
Instead of greed rooted in scarcity, leading to anxiety, Jesus says, just don't worry about it.
Why is it that Jesus' teaching is the gold standard, like the foundation for modern day ethics and human rights, but when it comes to economics, wealth, money, possessions, financial security, savings, he sounds like a reggae star.
Don't worry, be happy.
Is that really God's take on my 401k, my child's college fund, my investment portfolio, my tenure plan to get out of renting and into a mortgage?
Don't worry.
Jesus continues.
Well, it's kind of like bird watching or gardening.
Verse 24, consider the ravens.
They do not sow or reap.
They have no storeroom or barn.
Yet God feeds them.
And how much more valuable are you than the birds?
Jump down to 27.
Consider how the wildflowers grow.
They do not labor or spin.
Yet I tell you, not even Solomon and all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
Jesus says, pay attention to the plants and the animals that got something to teach you about provision.
What is happening here is a clash of worldviews.
Jesus's worldview, the lens through which he saw and lived is saturated in the story of God.
And Genesis one, the first page of the Bible paints a picture of creation as a place abundant with more than enough for every creature in God's world.
And that a Jesus psychology of abundance is the opposite.
of our modern psychology of scarcity.
Jesus is saying something like, pay attention to creation and what it tells you about the Creator.
Now I don't want you to miss this.
Jesus perceives the world to be a place that should free us from anxiety.
What news outlet is this guy watching?
Right?
Jesus views the world as a stable place where I am a guest being hosted by the most generous of hosts.
Why does Jesus sound like a spiritual sage on nearly every topic?
But when it comes to money, he sounds like a naive hippie who just doesn't get my unique situation.
because you and I are reading Jesus' teachings with the psychology of scarcity firmly intact.
And Jesus has a fundamentally different worldview to invite us into.
One so radically counter to our economy that until we adopt it as our own, his thoughts on money and possessions will sound illogical and easy to dismiss or at least nuance and justify.
Jesus says freedom from greed, the way out of anxiety and into peace starts with taking God seriously when he says creation is abundant.
Jesus' take on greed doesn't start with dollars and cents and black and white lines about how much is too much to possess.
It begins in the imagination with what you believe about the world and the provider.
Jesus' mindset is scarcity's opposite.
He lives with a psychology of abundance.
Scarcity in the mind produces anxiety in the emotions and greed in the world.
Abundance in the mind produces gratitude in the emotions and generosity in the world.
So how do I cultivate a psychology of abundance?
You pray the Psalms.
I think that's how Jesus did it.
Jesus, a first century Jew, would have grown up hearing his mom whisper the Psalms and prayer each and every morning.
He would have gathered in the temple daily to pray words like Psalm 104, which from start to finish is a meditation on God as abundant provider and generous host.
All creatures look to you to give them their food at the proper time.
When you give it to them, they gather it up.
When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things.
And what happens to me when I pay attention to God's abundance to his generosity rather than my want?
Well, back to the psalm.
I will sing to the Lord all my life.
I will sing praise to my God as long as I live.
May my meditation be pleasing to him as I rejoice in the Lord.
Meditating on God's abundance, taking on the mindset of Jesus gives way to ease, peace,
even joy.
That's Jesus' abundant worldview.
The creation is teeming with more than enough.
And I happened in to the home of a generous host and an extravagant provider.
But the world's most successful and sophisticated economies depend on keeping those most abundantly provided for, blind to their abundance and motivated by scarcity.
botanist Robin Wall Kimmerer in her collection of essays on the wisdom of Native Americans' rights.
In consumer society, contentment is a radical proposition.
Recognizing abundance rather than scarcity undermines an economy that thrives by creating unmet desires.
Gratitude cultivates an ethic of fullness, but the economy needs emptiness.
Gratitude doesn't send you out shopping to find satisfaction.
It comes as a gift rather than a commodity subverting the foundation of the whole economy.
Some of us picked up a scarcity mindset somewhere along the way of our own volition, but just as many of us were victims of scarcity because of the homes that we grew up in or the traumas that we experienced in our childhood.
Regardless, the prescription for healing is the same.
Meditate on God's abundance until His story is informing your life and not any lesser tale.
That's Jesus' abundance mindset, one that doesn't take on greed from without, but rots it from within.
Christmas just came and went, and Kay and I stalked the tree in our house the night before, and we were so excited to see our little boy's faces light up on Christmas morning.
Just imagine what a bummer it would be for me as a dad.
If my three little boys had popped out of the room on Christmas morning all carrying bags of gifts they'd bought for themselves just in case I didn't come through this year.
You know, the benefit of abundance versus scarcity is obvious, right?
Peace instead of anxiety?
Yes, please, sign me up.
The challenge of abundance, though, is freely choosing dependence on the generosity of another.
The challenge of a psychology of abundance is that it demands trust.
We spend our entire lives pursuing and maintaining financial independence, but if Jesus is our rabbi and his kingdom is our economy, that means we are ever in pursuit of the dangerous discomfort of dependence on God to be the abundant provider that he promises to be.
So here's a question worth pondering.
In what ways
Am I choosing to depend on God's generosity for my felt need?
And in what ways am I restricting God's generosity by my own self-sufficiency?
That's how a psychology of greed affects me.
But of course, greed affects others just as much.
So from a psychology to a sociology of greed, let's return to Luke chapter 12, skipping down now to verse 32.
Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
Sell your possessions and give to the poor.
Provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out, a treasure in heaven that will never fail, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
I obsessively purchased these snacks called David bars.
Somehow some guy, David, I'm assuming, cracked the code.
He made a healthy snack that genuinely tastes like cookie dough.
And Kirsten eats them too, but she never finishes the whole bar, which is mind-numbing to me.
Every time I'm cleaning out the car in the side door, I'll find half of a David bar with like a bunch of hair stuck to it and a crayon stabbed in it.
And I'm always like, ugh, it just always eats at me.
Cause I'm like, that's like $3 of bar.
Because like I said, David cracked the code, but David is aware of this fact.
And I am compensating him for it.
Sometimes Kirsten even gives David bars to our kids, which quietly kills me.
Because Amos is three.
Like Z bars are working just fine.
He doesn't need a complex blend of lean proteins and fibers and essential nutrients.
Do?
So a couple months ago, there was a full blown crisis in my home.
We were almost out of David bars and Amazon was entirely out of stock, which up to that point, I genuinely didn't know was a possibility for literally any product because regardless of your take on Eden, we can all agree that Amazon is teaming with an abundance.
Is it not?
So I did, I opened the pantry.
We got two David bars left and none on the way.
So I did the obvious thing.
I ate one and I put the other one in my backpack for later.
I made sure that I got the one I needed and the one I didn't need.
And when I got to work that morning, not even hungry anymore.
and saw that extra David bar in my bag, a thought crossed my mind.
If I'm doing this with snacks, what else am I doing it with?
Greed, as defined by one biblical scholar, is the desire to acquire without reference to one's own specific needs or the situation of others.
Greed in layman's terms is taking more than I need for myself regardless of how that affects other people.
And according to Jesus, freedom for the greedy person and provision for the needy person can both be traced back to the same place, stewarding the abundance of God's creation generously rather than greedily.
But that is not the Western economy.
It's not the American anxiety.
And it's probably not the advice that you'll be given from your financial advisor.
So to live the way of Jesus when it comes to money starts again with a shift in worldview, seeing God's creation in my place and it according to God's abundance.
Rewind with me back to the Old Testament law, God's economy, the one that is forming Jesus's imagination was given to Israel in preparation for entering the promised land of his abundance.
And it can be boiled down to four core principles, sharing, gleaning, tithing and jubilee.
A brief word on each one of those.
First, sharing.
On the long journey through the wilderness, God feeds the Israeli people daily with a portion of manna and quail.
That's bread and meat.
So the gluten-free vegetarians were just out of luck.
Half of Portland would be asking Yahweh for substitutions.
Exodus 16.
This is what the Lord has commanded.
Everyone is to gather as much as they need.
Take an omer for each person in your tent.
The Israelites did as they were told.
Some gathered much, some little, and when they measured it by the omer, the one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.
Everyone gathered just as much as they needed.
Take only what you need for today.
Share what I provide with the community.
That's the beginning of God's economy, but it didn't last long.
Just a couple of verses later.
However, some of them paid no attention to Moses.
They kept part of it until morning, but it was full of maggots and began to smell.
Some people started collecting more than they needed.
What if God doesn't provide tomorrow?
What if I don't have enough?
Scarcity began to creep in.
Having food for tomorrow was not the main issue.
God is not anti-leftovers.
The issue was that God gave them exactly what the whole community needed each day.
So to take extra for tomorrow was to leave someone else with nothing for today.
God intentionally gave his people food that expired overnight.
He made saving impossible.
Why would he do that?
because he wanted to free them from scarcity and into the abundance of trusting him and loving one another.
God freed their bodies by parting a sea, but he was freeing their hearts by giving them manna every day and just enough for today by teaching them a new economy.
One where God is my provider and my neighbor is my responsibility.
Not long after that, when the people settled, God introduced another law, gleaning, Leviticus 19.
When you reap the harvest of your land, do not reap the very edges of your field or gather the gleaning of your harvest.
Do not go over the vineyard a second time or pick up the grapes that have fallen.
Leave them for the poor and the foreigner.
I am the Lord your God plant seeds and tend a portion of your harvest.
You plan never to take in for yourself.
Your home should be financially structured as a place of provision for the poor.
It gets even more interesting when you see the logic beneath this command because God explains himself in Deuteronomy 24.
Do not deprive the foreigner or the fatherless of justice or take the cloak of the widow as a pledge.
Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you from there.
That is why I've commanded you to do this and then follows the exact same gleaning provision that we see in Leviticus 19.
So from God's perspective, if you buy your own seeds,
tend your own crop and then reap the full harvest for yourself and those living in your home.
You are depriving the poor and the fatherless of justice.
How does that work?
Remember that while you were slaves in Egypt, the Lord your God redeemed you.
That is why
I've commanded you to do this, says the Lord, because your freedom, your property, the seeds in your hand and the garden that you're planting, all of that was won for you by God when you were poor and powerless.
All that you own is really just a rental.
It's resources God has loaned you to steward for the sake of others.
So when you take a rental meant to be stewarded for others and use it all for yourself,
You are robbing my world of justice.
Then comes the most well-known principle, tithing, which most people know as 10%.
Give God via the church or some other donation for the common good, 10% of everything you earn.
That's a tithe, right?
Meaning 10th.
What's really interesting is that there's actually three separate places in the Torah that reference this principle.
And while there is some debate, what does seem plain is that the ancient Israelites were not called to give away 10% of their annual income.
They were commanded to give away 10% annually to the temple, but they were also commanded in Deuteronomy 14 to give away an additional 10% to throw an annual
party a massive feast in their local town where they would break bread with the poor.
And they were also told to save up for a tithe they would give every three years to the ancient equivalent of the local food bank.
So there's some math required to get to the bottom of what tithing really looked like in full and ancient Israel.
But the scholarly consensus is that the Israelites were offering back to God at least 23% of their annual income.
And finally and most radically, that leaves Jubilee.
When every 50 years all land would be returned to its original owner free of charge, no questions asked.
It's right there in Leviticus 25.
The land must not be sold permanently because the land is mine and you reside in my land as foreigners and strangers.
So in God's economy, you hold everything loosely, everything with open hands.
So go ahead and invest, grow your farm, do your thing, own what you want, but possess nothing.
Keep firmly in mind that everything you own is really just borrowed.
It belongs to God.
And a loan is very different than something you buy.
You take care of it differently when it belongs to someone else.
John Mark, the founding pastor of this church and one of my very best friends, he holds an annual tradition with my family.
One week every summer, his family goes on vacation and my family goes on vacation the same week to his house.
We drive their cars and sleep in their beds and pretend for a week that we live near the ocean in Los Angeles.
And in exchange, we walk their dog twice a day.
It's honestly a pretty good deal on my end.
But a couple of years ago, Kay and I were stressed because Simon was coloring with markers in the kitchen and the ink bled through the paper and onto the beautiful, brand new stone kitchen countertops that John Mark had excitedly and giddily told me about when they were installed just a couple of months prior to this.
We bought some super exclusive stone safe scrubbing solution and we cleaned and cleaned and cleaned and it was not coming up.
We tried everything.
And then I eventually sent John Mark a seven minute voice memo explaining how sorry I was and how I didn't know quite how it happened and how I would chisel a new slab of stone myself.
if he just pointed me in the right direction.
Now if that was our kitchen countertop and our home here in Portland, it all would have been so much more relaxed and so much less of a big deal, right?
So why were we so worked up about it this time?
Well, partially to be completely honest, because if you know John Mark, he's not really a markers on the countertop kind of guy, right?
It's not really my man's vibe.
Juan Marcos is very serious about the cleanliness of his counters, I'm just saying.
But much more importantly, because we were stewarding something temporarily on behalf of someone else, and that made it intrinsically more valuable.
Now thankfully, John Mark laughed it off, and my point is that all of these economic principles, coloring Jesus' imagination, were built on the foundation of stewardship.
everything in creation belongs to God, so all that I have today is borrowed from God to be distributed according to his abundant character.
God's economy is profoundly conscious of God and others.
Greed's economy ignores both.
It ignores God because it insulates me from my need of trusting God for my own welfare, and it ignores others because it hoards what I might need one day instead of offering to God
Meet another's apparent need today.
Jesus' holistic teaching on money could be summed up like this.
If you make the focus of your relationship to money, your own personal long-term security, what you will paradoxically find is that you'll never feel secure.
you will be ruined by anxiety and destructively spread the serpent's life through society, not to mention the structures that you are trusting in are a part of a fading kingdom that is going to collapse in on itself and fail you when you really need it anyway.
Jesus' ministry began when he returned from the wilderness, strolled into the synagogue and declared himself good news for the poor.
So how about you?
follower of that rabbi, carrier of that message.
Is your life in Portland good news for the poor?
Is your very existence among your neighbors a relieving announcement to anyone and everyone in need?
Because if Jesus is the one I'm becoming like and that's where his ministry started.
Shouldn't mind start in the same place?
Question.
What do I have more than enough of?
And who could I share it with?
Finally, and most provocatively to a spirituality of greed.
In Matthew's record of the same teaching that we're reading tonight in Luke, there's an interesting little wrinkle at it.
Matthew chapter six, verse 24.
No one can serve two masters.
Either you hate the one and love the other, or you'll be devoted to the one and despise the other.
You cannot serve both God and money.
Now your Bible almost certainly reads money, most English translations do, but Jesus didn't say money.
He said you cannot serve both God and Mammon.
Now Mammon is an Aramaic word, but the New Testament is written in Greek.
In fact, Mammon is one of only two Aramaic words, the early gospel writers, universally left untranslated.
You've got Abba and Mammon.
Those are the two Aramaic words found in the early manuscripts of the gospels.
The revolutionary name that Jesus used to refer to God, father, a scandal of intimacy, and the loaded name Jesus used to refer to money, mammon, a scandal of deceptive power.
All the way back in the first century, teachers and bishops concluded that mammon couldn't just be translated as money or wealth because those were neutral terms for economic currency.
But what Jesus had in mind here wasn't a neutral but a material concept charged with demonic power.
You see, in the imagination of Jesus, mammon is more than money.
It is material wealth charged with demonic power to deceive.
It's an anti-God that finds its power in money and then seeks to deceive, warp and ultimately master its devoted worshipers.
Now I know, I know you are an enlightened Westerner who doesn't believe in all that hocus pocus.
Sure, just follow Jesus' train of thought before you pass judgment on it.
Jesus is very plainly saying that God's greatest competition for your heart's devotion probably isn't a moral folly or a dysfunctional relationship or your baggage with organized religion.
It's your stuff.
The stuff you have, the stuff you want, the stuff you don't even know that you want yet.
It's your mammon.
And I'm not cherry picking one quote from Jesus and then magnifying it.
This is not a one off, it's a theme.
In the four gospels, Jesus talks about money more than any other topic except the kingdom of God.
Jesus is teaching priorities are the kingdom of God.
money, and then there's a steep drop off after number two until you get to number three.
Jesus talks about money three times more than he talks about love and seven times more than prayer.
17 of Jesus's 39 parables are about money.
The scholarly estimate is that about 25% of Jesus's teaching is about money and possessions on some level.
So why is Jesus so uptight about my cash and my stuff?
Well, I've heard it said that a friend is someone who will help you move.
And by that metric, my older brother Josh is the best friend I've ever had by a long shot, because he's helped me move six or seven times now.
New York City, where we both lived for many years, is like a game of jumping from least to least, because every landlord tries to gouge you on year two right when you get comfortable.
And when Kirsten and I first got married, we found this very comfy leather couch on Craigslist, but it also weighed like 400 pounds.
And every building we ever lived in was a walkup.
So Josh and I wedged that couch up a comical amount of narrow staircases.
And I then would repay him year after year with a lukewarm slice of pizza from the local dollar pizza spot.
I remember every one of those moves.
I remember every comical situation that we got ourselves into and got through together.
And I guarantee you that he does too.
And then finally, more than a decade into life in New York, Kay and I were slightly more financially established.
And for the very first time in our lives, we hired a moving company.
And do you know what I remember about that move?
Nothing.
No sweating, no swearing, no U-Hauls and smashed fingers and aching backs.
And thank you so much.
I can't believe you helped me do this again.
Here, carb up with one slice.
No memories.
And instead, I just handed over the money and then I walked to my place a couple hours later to unpack some boxes after all of the hard work had been done.
What had previously required friendship, I could now take care of with cash.
And that's what money affords us, the ability to get what we want without the entanglements of relationship.
All the way back in Genesis, the first problem noted in God's good creation is it is not good for the human to be alone.
That's from the mouth of God before sin.
So life in community dependent on both God and others is a feature of God's flourishing world, not a bug.
The second problem noted in the garden was the intrusion of a lie from the mouth of a crafty deceiver.
Does anyone remember that lie?
You will be like God as in you will become greater, become more, become independent without need, without reliance on God or others.
You will be your own provider, a lie so deceptive that it mastered all of creation.
Andy Crouch writes, the distinctive thing that money allows us, its most seductive promise is abundance without dependence.
Getting what I want by my own means apart from entangling myself in relationship to God or community.
The trouble with money is that it isolates us from others.
It prevents others from entering into our need and us from entering into theirs.
And that, according to God, is not good.
Aristotle famously said, if you could have all the goods that the world could give, but had to have them without friendship, you'd choose not to have them.
In our world of constant connection and chronic loneliness, thousands of acquaintances, but so few friends, we are becoming less and less capable of sharing our needs and our resources with one another, not more.
Irish poet John O'Donohue said, we are becoming post-graduates in the art of acquaintance and poppers in the art of friendship.
You can't cultivate rich substantive relationship without need.
You can't get relational abundance without dependence.
Mammon makes a promise to you and I that it cannot keep abundance without dependence.
Hang on a second.
What was the original lie again?
The one that infected all of creation?
You will be like God.
Like God is in you will be abundant without dependence.
And all who believe this lie find themselves in the most ancient of tragic cycles.
I reach for the promise and suddenly find myself naked and ashamed.
No amount of reaching and grasping, no amount of accumulating ever makes me feel clothed, secure, satisfied, seen or loved.
A promise that I thought would make me more turns out to be a lie that makes me less.
The Lord is my shepherd.
I shall not want David famously prayed.
But if man is my shepherd, then I reach for what God wants to give me without entangling myself in relationship to God or anybody else.
And I find them with every taste, the want that I'm trying to satisfy only grows stronger and stronger.
And this is what Jesus is getting at.
It's why Mammon is more than just economic organization, but a material commodity infected by the serpent's lie, because money can be, doesn't have to be, but it certainly can be a means of reaching for the forbidden fruit all over again, reaching and grasping for the deceiver's lie, not God's blessing.
Money, according to Jesus, wants something from us to separate abundance
from dependence, the illusion of getting what we want without the entanglements of relationship.
There is nothing evil about money.
There is nothing intrinsically noble or shameful about having a lot or a little of it.
Do you hear me?
It's not so much that Jesus is suspicious of wealth.
God himself is wealthy.
And the promised rest God is leading us to is depicted from cover to cover in the scriptures as extravagant abundance.
It's the promised land flowing with milk and honey.
It is the wine, grain and oil on Mount Zion.
It is the
Spat and calf slaughtered and a feast on the father's estate for a whole family of prodigals.
Jesus is not anti-wealth.
He's not particularly suspicious of money.
Jesus is very, very suspicious of what money does to the human heart.
Money in and of itself is not evil, but the love of money greed
is the root of all kinds of evil.
And this is what makes greed so dangerous.
Money and possessions are like no other false God.
They offer security, comfort, meaning, significant status, identity, purpose, pleasure,
Greed is a Trojan horse that sneaks into our economic systems, forming our imaginations, our emotions, our habits, and ultimately our societies.
If you think you can follow Jesus and your wealth and possessions are not a threat to guard yourself against, you are asleep to the hold this has on you, and that is robbing you of true riches.
According to Jesus, your money and possessions might just be the greatest threat to kingdom fruit in your life.
And according to Jesus, your money and possessions might just be the greatest opportunity for kingdom fruit in your life.
Because ultimately Jesus concludes here in verse 34, for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
You can relate to mammon, Jesus says, to your money and your stuff right now in a way that lasts forever.
You see, Jesus' whole point is that you and I can live in the present in a way that invests in new creation.
We can steward earthly wealth today in a way that is investing in heaven's return.
William Wilberforce was a wealthy Brit who was born into a whole lot of privilege and prestige and then converted to Jesus in his early twenties.
And he first thought he should probably become a pastor but then
He looked around at God's creation and his society and he saw my local economy is built on the enslavement of other human beings.
It is the opposite of God's design and heaven's renewal.
So maybe the way for me to follow Jesus, he thought, is to reform the economy and abolish slavery.
Now it is very, very difficult to put into words just how far-fetched an idea that was at the time.
The entire economic system was built on the enslavement of a very large percentage of the population.
There was no plausibility structure where this was possible.
And Wilberforce thinks, I'll get a few friends together and just give it a go.
And they called themselves the Clapham Sect.
And they abolished slavery in 1807 when Wilberforce was 74 years old.
Approximately 50 years into the effort, he saw
and economic impossibility come to pass in his lifetime.
And sure, they advocated politically, but the key wasn't their eloquence or advocacy or protest.
It was their generosity.
Wilberforce gave 25% of his income to charitable causes throughout his life.
And at the end of his life, he had to rent his home because he had leveraged everything he had for the cause.
Another member, Henry Thornton, was a wealthy banker who gave away six sevenths of his income annually.
Granville Sharp gave his life savings toward this cause.
Thomas Buxton gave the majority of his wealth to see it through.
Zachary Macaulay narrowly avoided bankruptcy because he leveraged everything he had so sacrificially to see it get done.
Because if you want to restore creation to God's generous image, well then at some point you're going to have to put your money where your mouth is.
Practice generosity, live abundantly, choose, even celebrate dependence on God in the midst of a society deceived into independence.
One of the most obvious direct ways to live our vision in Portland as it is in heaven is to live my earthly life in Portland by the economy of heaven that I'm waiting on.
The antidote to greed is generosity.
God's primary method of provision from the first page of Genesis to the Old Testament law to the teachings of Jesus to the New Testament church to early church history all the way 2000 years forward to today.
God's primary method for abundantly meeting the needs of the world at any time in history has always been the generosity of his church.
Generosity sets the wealthy free from the captivity of grief and it sets plenty on the table of the poor at the same time.
In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus seems to replace the Old Testament command of tithing with the New Testament invitation to generosity.
In fact, there is no direct command to tithe anywhere on the pages of the New Testament.
So you're off the hook for that 23%.
We've been set free from the law, so there is freedom for you in deciding when, how, what, and to whom you give.
Jesus came to fulfill the law and not to abolish it.
And the through line of the Sermon on the Mount is that Jesus is repeatedly raising the bar on obedience to every Old Testament command never once is he lowering it.
I'm not commanding you not to murder.
I'm teaching you to live so free that you never even curse another human being.
I'm not commanding you not to commit adultery.
I'm showing you a way of seeing others with such dignity and love that you don't even lust after another person.
I'm not commanding you to tithe.
I'm calling you beyond tithing and into a life of generosity.
Jesus is calling us up from tithing to generosity.
It is very, very difficult to imagine that generosity is the one area in the entire sermon that he meant for us to reverse the pattern and lower the bar rather than raise it.
So you and I have been set free from a command to 23% so that we can live far beyond a command to 23%.
C.S.
Lewis was a small-time rider in rural England who suddenly came into some money.
I'm not sure if you've heard of Narnia, but it sold a few copies.
Did quite well as it turns out.
So he goes from putzing around with a pipe to just raking in cash.
And he starts to wonder how he's going to deal with all of this income in the way of Jesus.
So he had this crazy thought.
Well, if the love of money is the root of all kinds of evil, then maybe the love of generosity is the root of all kinds of good.
And so he established a fund that he termed the agopony, which is a made up Greek word, reversing the terminology of 1 Timothy 6 to read the love of generosity.
And Lewis gave away two-thirds of his annual income into that fund, the Agopony, so that the majority of his income was being sown generously back into his society before it even touched his bank account.
That's compelling.
But you and I didn't write a best-selling book series.
And generosity is not an exclusive ethic for the wealthy.
A few months ago on a Sunday morning I was
approached by a woman in this church who was looking for the offering box, and she couldn't find it, so she handed me a wad of cash and said, will you please deposit this for me?
And I did.
Only later did I find out that this woman had been incarcerated and recently released, that during her time in prison she'd come to faith in Jesus and been baptized by a community from this church that serves in that prison.
and that she had a job behind bars where she collected a very, very modest check, and she began from the moment of her baptism over the months that followed, setting aside a portion of every single one of those modest paychecks, savoring it as an offering to bring to God.
The first Sunday she was released, and that was her first Sunday outside of prison, her first Sunday in this church, and the wad of cash she brought me was that offering she had saved up to bring to God.
All of the research suggests that the more money we get, the less philanthropic we become, not more.
If you are waiting until you have access to increase in generosity, you are fooling yourself.
No one thinks they have enough to give away because money is a deceptive commodity.
Generosity is not about the size of the gift.
It's about the heart of the giver.
So start where you are and start today.
Maybe you've
never given to the local church at all.
Maybe you've been on cruise control at 10% so long that God wants to call you up from there.
Maybe a neighbor or a need in your community or a cause in our city has come to mind and you're feeling compelled to do something about it.
Look, if it trips you up that I'm a local pastor and I'm talking to you about money this evening, then give elsewhere, not to Bridgetown church.
Give somewhere that you trust, just give.
live in this world by the economy of the one to come, invest right now in Heaven's return.
So as we gather this week around tables in our Bridgetown communities, we're going to continue the practice of community through the exercise of confession this week, focusing in on greed.
But to close, one last question to Ponder.
Is the way I relate to money more reflective of the American economy or God's economy?
And what is one step, just one practical change that I can make to live more generously in my relationship to money and possessions?
Like maybe you need to leave here and talk to a spouse or a family member or someone that your finances are all tangled up with.
But the life of generosity is in the living.
Intellectually musing on Jesus' radical teaching on arguably our culture's greatest idol does not lead to abundance.
Living Jesus' teaching leads to abundance.
So let's start where we are and start today by considering how God might be inviting me to move my life one inch in the direction of His kingdom and His economy.
What is one?
Just one.
practical change that I can make in my relationship to money and possessions.
Would you come now, Holy Spirit?
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgetown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church slash giving.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.